# Introduction to Hashcat

Hashcat is a well-known password cracking tool for Linux, Windows, and macOS. From 2009 until 2015 it was proprietary software, but has since been released as open-source. Featuring fantastic GPU support, it can be used to crack a large variety of hashes.

## General Syntax

The general syntax used to run hashcat is as follows:

```bash
hashcat -a 0 -m 0 <hashes> [wordlist, rule, mask, ...]
```

In the command above:

- `-a` is used to specify the attack mode
- `-m` is used to specify the hash type
- `<hashes>` is either a hash string, or a file containing one or more password hashes of the same type
- `[wordlist, rule, mask, ...]` is a placeholder for additional arguments that depend on the attack mode

## Hash Types

Hashcat supports hundreds of different hash types, each of which is assigned an ID. A list of associated IDs can be generated by running `hashcat --help`.

The [hashcat website](https://hashcat.net/) hosts a comprehensive list of example hashes which can assist in manually identifying an unknown hash type and determining the corresponding Hashcat hash mode identifier.

Alternatively, `hashID` can be used to quickly identify the hashcat hash type by specifying the `-m` argument:

```bash
hashid -m '$1$FNr44XZC$wQxY6HHLrgrGX0e1195k.1'
```

Output:
```
Analyzing '$1$FNr44XZC$wQxY6HHLrgrGX0e1195k.1'
[+] MD5 Crypt [Hashcat Mode: 500]
[+] Cisco-IOS(MD5) [Hashcat Mode: 500]
[+] FreeBSD MD5 [Hashcat Mode: 500]
```

## Attack Modes

### Dictionary Attack

Dictionary attack (`-a 0`) is a dictionary attack where the user provides password hashes and a wordlist as input. Hashcat tests each word in the list as a potential password until the correct one is found or the list is exhausted.

A wordlist alone is often not enough to crack a password hash. Rules can be used to perform specific modifications to passwords to generate even more guesses. The rule files that come with hashcat are typically found under `/usr/share/hashcat/rules`. To perform this kind of attack, append the `-r <ruleset>` option to the command.

### Mask Attack

Mask attack (`-a 3`) is a type of brute-force attack in which the keyspace is explicitly defined by the user. For example, if we know that a password is eight characters long, we might define a mask that tests combinations of six letters followed by two numbers rather than attempting every possible combination.

A mask is defined by combining a sequence of symbols, each representing a built-in or custom character set. Hashcat includes several built-in character sets:

| Symbol | Charset |
|--------|---------|
| `?l` | abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz |
| `?u` | ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ |
| `?d` | 0123456789 |
| `?h` | 0123456789abcdef |
| `?H` | 0123456789ABCDEF |
| `?s` | «space»!"#$%&'()*+,-./:;<=>?@[\]^_\`{ |
| `?a` | `?l?u?d?s` |
| `?b` | 0x00 - 0xff |

Custom charsets can be defined with the `-1`, `-2`, `-3`, and `-4` arguments, then referred to with `?1`, `?2`, `?3`, and `?4`.

For example, to try passwords which start with an uppercase letter, continue with four lowercase letters, a digit, and then a symbol, the resulting hashcat mask would be: `?u?l?l?l?l?d?s`